Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. For 20 years, Roger Zelazny has been
writing science fiction and fantasy. He tells us why and how he became a science
fiction writer. Well, it's a funny thing. I was
originally a reader of science fiction from about the age of 11 on through high
school. And during that period, I did write a lot of science fiction stories,
which I tried to sell, but I was like in my early teens and I didn't really meet
with any success at that point. And I decided actually before that that I'd
wanted to be a writer. I wasn't, it wasn't necessarily science fiction that I
had in mind, though it was science fiction stories that I was writing during the
period I was reading them. When I went to college, I stopped reading science
fiction, just to concentrate on the material I had there, and I wrote poetry
actually, exclusively. I decided that I was going to start writing again as soon
as I got out of college and had some time. And at that point, I wasn't
absolutely certain what it was that I would try writing. But when the
opportunity finally presented itself in early 1962,
I decided it might be easier for me to break into science fiction since I had
read so much of it in the past. I just knew the area, so I decided I'd try there
first. And I went out and re-familiarized myself with science fiction. And then
I began writing and submitting the stories, and after about six or seven weeks,
I sold my first one. And I sold 16 others that year, so I stayed with it.
Zelazny has always been recognized as a stylist, a writer to whom craftsmanship
is important. His characters have depth, and his prose is coherent and flexible.
Right. And that's an important point to make. Science fiction has traditionally
been a field in which style and character were secondary to plot and idea.
Zelazny's college background in his major field of study, English, may have had
some influence on his writing. As an undergraduate, I was a psychology major.
And I decided I did not really want to work as a psychologist. And it occurred
to me somewhere along the line that if I were simply going to be teaching and
writing with the aim in mind of eventually writing full-time, I might as well
teach something that would be a little more fun than psychology. So I switched
to English and took my graduate work in English and comparative literature. As a
result of this background, Zelazny says, his stories had some characteristics
not common to traditional science fiction. I suppose, having grown up on the
earlier sort of science fiction, the space opera sort of thing of the 30s and
40s too, and the harder science stories of the 40s and some of the sociological
science fiction of the 50s, and having a background in literature,
there's a natural tendency, whether it's conscious or not, to want to do
something different than things that had gone before. As a consequence, my
stories, well, the first ones were basically gimmick stories because it was the
easiest way to break in. It was about all that I was capable of doing at the
time. But when I began writing at greater length and when I was a bit surer of
myself, I would think of the characters first. So the stories tended to have
more, I suppose, in the way of psychological motivation rather than just
external characterization. And my writing itself, possibly because of the years
I'd spent writing poetry and reading general literature, tended to be a bit
different from some of the earlier things which were kind of journalistic in
character. More next time about Roger Zelazny.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Science fiction authors sometimes write
fantasy, and fantasy authors sometimes write science fiction. Roger Zelazny
writes both. He talks about the differences between the two forms. I do make the
distinction myself. I mean, in a science fiction story, everything I feel should
be explainable in terms of natural laws or extensions of natural laws as we
understand them now. Whereas in a fantasy story, it's part of the rules of the
game, so I feel there are no compunctions against invoking the supernatural or
bringing in magic and things of that sort. But, um, and so basically a science
fiction story, things are ultimately explainable in a fantasy story. They,
they're explainable really in terms of something that isn't explainable. So, um,
you've got more of the, you've got the, the less rational background, uh, if you
push things far enough in a fantasy story. Zelazny says he writes some of his
books so that they can be read either way. I also believe in, in, in mixing, uh,
the two.
Well, Lord of Light, for instance, was a book which, where I intentionally wrote
it to be taken two ways. A fantasy, uh, fan could, uh, read it as a piece of
fantasy, whereas a science fiction fan, uh, also had options available to him.
Any single item which occurs in there, um, which is of an unusual nature, is
that there's ultimately an explanation available for it if the person cares to
use it. If he doesn't, that's fine too. Zelazny makes an interesting point about
science fiction. He says that sometimes a science fiction story will become a
fantasy story after a certain amount of time. And he uses one of his own
stories, "A Rose for Ecclesiastes", as an example. It's, it's kind of funny too,
because, I think the first story for which I became known, uh, was a piece
called "A Rose for Ecclesiastes". And, um,
uh, one of my reasons in writing this is because I was very fond of the earlier
space operas and things like this, where they, you know, John Carter of Mars,
or, and I had always wanted to do something set on the Mars, which existed in
these earlier stories. And I knew at the time I wrote it, that it was
scientifically impossible at that point. We already knew enough about Mars to
know that, uh, the temperature was not the same as I had it in the story, that
the atmosphere was not the same, and so forth. But it was close enough to the
point where this knowledge was just becoming current that I could still get away
with doing a thing like that. So I intentionally wrote that, uh, and wrote it in
the fashion I did, um, I was a kind of exercise in nostalgia on my part. I'd
always wanted to do a story, um, set on that kind of Mars. And I knew that if I
waited another year or so, I wouldn't be able to, uh, the same with Venus for,
uh, my story, The Doors of His Face, The Lamps of His Mouth. At that point, we
already were aware that the surface temperature was about 900 degrees, but still
there were these, there was this whole traditional body of science fiction
literature, which, had a vast watery world, misty and so forth, uh, that I
really had wanted to use at least once in my life. So I did those two stories as
a kind of tribute to the earlier things. Um, but then again, I wrote them the
way I was writing then rather than in the older style. So the, uh, reading them
now, they'd have to be regarded as fantasy rather than science fiction because,
uh, science has already demonstrated that those circumstances don't prevail.
More on Roger Zelazny tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Many science fiction and fantasy authors
these days write novels in series, in three, four, and sometimes five book sets.
Jack Chalker's Well World series, or Elizabeth Lynn's trilogy, The Chronicles of
Tornor, are two good examples. It's a commercially attractive idea, for one
thing. If readers like the first book, then there's a ready-made market for the
following ones. And, of course, it also allows an author the scope to pursue a
theme in greater depth and length than a single book would allow. And the extra
depth can give an epic quality to the series. One of the best of the series is a
set of five books by Roger Zelazny, a science fantasy adventure called, simply,
The Amber Series. The first volume is entitled Nine Princes in Amber, and it was
published in 1971. The other four, The Guns of Avalon, Sign of the Unicorn, The
Hand of Oberon, and The Courts of Chaos. Zelazny calls the book something
besides science fantasy. Whenever I try anything of this sort, I try to give it
an extra twist, is what it is. Basically, I look at it myself as a kind of
heroic fantasy, with a few variations that don't usually occur in that sort of
literature. One of the variations Zelazny develops in the books is what's called
the pattern. It is a kind of archetypal design which exists in the real world,
of which our own Earth and a great variety of shadings and variations thereof
exist. Amber is the real world, and the others are referred to as shadow, or
shadow in the stories. The background, the basis of reality in Amber is this
design called the pattern, which was inscribed by an ancestor of the clan about
whom the story is told. Only a person of the blood of the royal family of Amber
is able to walk this pattern and not be destroyed by it. And in the course of
walking the pattern, at some point in his early life,
Amberite acquires the ability to walk through the various shadow worlds, which
surround Amber, so that he can travel through an infinity of possibilities to
virtually any world he desires. The basic plot of the series consists of a
struggle for the throne of Amber, and in the process, our Earth is threatened
with destruction, since we're only a shadow of the real world of Amber. In the
struggle, the main character, Corwin, keeps traveling between our Earth and
Amber. Technology doesn't work in Amber, so the people there fight with swords
and magic. For this reason, the books are called science fantasy, or as Zelazny
said, heroic fantasy. They've been very popular, too. Zelazny says the readers
have responded enthusiastically. I have gotten more fan letters on the Amber
books than anything else I've ever written. There was a period of a couple years
there where I was getting several letters a week on the Amber books. The
narrative was concluded with an exciting climax in the fifth book, The Courts of
Chaos. Because of the wide reader response, though, and because there were some
unanswered questions in that last book, a sixth novel on Amber is a possibility.
There is possibly a sixth one. I have made no commitments. I do not have a plot.
But I've been talking about it and thinking about it, publisher.
And it is possible when I get a few things out of the way that I'm writing now
that I might go on and do a sixth one. But so far as the five books that now
exist are concerned, that story is told. That was the story I had in mind.
Anything which would continue. The series would probably take off in a new
direction. It could possibly be from another character's point of view. More
about Roger Zelazny next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. One of the more interesting time travel
books in recent years is Roadmarks by Roger Zelazny. Though time travel is one
of the traditional science fiction themes, Zelazny doesn't often write that type
of story. I have always attempted to avoid time travel stories because I don't
like the paradoxes involved. In fact, the only thing I can think of that I had
done in the past was a short story called "Divine Madness". I said that I really
wouldn't write a time travel story unless I came up with a new gimmick.
Well, for Roadmarks, I thought I had something just in the image of time
considered as a superhighway, basically, and withouts for the paradoxes in the
Everett Wheeler parallel world sort of situation. And it was really the image of
the road that fascinated me and led to my writing that particular book. Time is
conceived as a superhighway in Roadmarks, with the exits leading to different
eras throughout time. Zelazny has an interesting story to tell regarding the
origin of the idea behind Roadmarks. I got the idea for that book here in New
Mexico, really. One Sunday, I was just out for a drive on I-25, which is a nice
highway
-type road. I took a turn off and drove for a few minutes, and the road rapidly
degenerated until, within a matter of minutes, I was on a dirt road, and I
passed through a place that I couldn't even find on the map. It was a little
village where there was a horse pulling a wagon and no overhead electrical lines
in sight. It was almost as if I had driven back through time into the 19th
century. There were log buildings.
Somewhere around there, something started to click. And as I drove back again,
the road improved and improved until finally I was on the superhighway, I
started working out just the mechanisms for the idea of driving through time,
which I used in Roadmarks. Actually, by the time I got home, I had a number of
the situations worked out, and I sat down and began writing it.
The protagonist is a man named Red Dorakeen. He travels up and down this highway
of time in a battered old pickup. And when he's not trying to avoid and outwit
some assassins who are after him, he's running guns to the Greeks back in the
past at Marathon. And there's something else in the book that's a recurring
motif or symbol. Huge dragons that float above the road occasionally. Their
function is not clear, but they seem to have some responsibility for the road.
Oh, they were simply to represent the dark forces, which I tend to bring in any
fantasy novel. In a story like this, there has to be a point where you have to
ultimately reach something that's basically unexplainable. Namely, where did the
road come from and how did it come to function the way that it did? And in
making a decision on that, I could go either way. I could find some science
fiction trappings and explain it, or I could leave it intentionally, something
shadowy and with a more fantasy background. If I did that, I'd decide I needed
some symbol to invoke as an ultimate creator of the road. So hence the dragons
and then their tie in with red. Road Marks, published in 1981, is a different
sort of time travel story, tending toward the fantasy rather than the science
fiction end of the spectrum. And since Roger Zelazny is responsible for it, it's
highly enjoyable. And we'll have more on Roger Zelazny on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. Writer Roger Zelazny has won numerous
awards in the field of science fiction and fantasy, and he's been writing it for
some 20 years. Zelazny has a scholarly background which often shows up in his
books. The way he uses mythology, for instance, in novels like Lord of Light or
This Immortal, or psychology in The Dream Masters. He has a master's degree in
literature, and his knowledge of history is extensive. He's read deeply in the
mythologies and early literature of mankind, and he also reads a great deal of
modern literature, both science fiction and otherwise. He has some interesting
ideas on science fiction and fantasy and its place in the modern world. Science
fiction is a special genre to him for a few basic reasons. It is, for one
reason, one of the few special places where you still deal with characters
other than those which occur in the modern realistic or naturalistic novel. Now,
going back to the critic Northrop Frye, who broke characters into various modes,
science fiction is one of the few places outside of, say, modern poetry where a
writer can deal with characters in what he'd call the high mimetic or the mythic
modes, that is, characters who are greater than their fellow man or characters
who are godlike. Sometimes, in that, science fiction does deal with mutants and
aliens and sentient computers and cyborgs and robots, what have you, just whole
categories of beings which are different than the characters you meet with in a
naturalistic or realistic novel. So, in that sense, and I think this is one of
the great virtues of science fiction, it gives the writer more scope for
exploration in terms of character.
Besides the freedom or scope that science fiction provides for a writer, it also
has one other quality that Zelazny feels differentiates it from general or
mainstream literature. I think that science fiction is still, basically for all
of the experimentation that went on in the 60s, is a bastion of storytelling.
The idea is not necessarily the hero anymore, as it was in the days Kingsley
Amis referred to it as being such back in the 40s and perhaps the 50s, but we
have real characters now, and ideas are handled in a more sophisticated fashion.
The writing has also improved from a stylistic standpoint, but basically I think
if you looked at the area, well, even statistically, there are more examples of
straightforward storytelling in science fiction than you might find in general
fiction at large. So that is another reason I am very fond of science fiction,
because I am basically a storyteller, no matter what I do with mythology or
writing devices. Does Zelazny think science fiction will ever merge with general
literature and gain a wider acceptance? I don't think it will necessarily be
merged with the mainstream, and I also do not think that this is necessarily a
bad thing at all. It was Santayana who said about something else entirely, but
which I think is apropos, that to attempt to give such things a wide currency is
to be willing to denature them in order to boast that they've been propagated. I
think science fiction will always have its devotees, and that they will grow in
number just as the population itself increases, but I don't know that the
percentage is ever going to increase that greatly. The chances are pretty good
that science fiction has at least a few more readers and fans than it would have
had had Zelazny not taken it up. His works stand as an advertisement for the
quality and value of good science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.